Remember that secrets encode data in base64 format. Anyone with the base64 encoded secret can easily decode it. As such the secrets can be considered as not very safe.

The concept of safety of the Secrets is a bit confusing in Kubernetes. The kubernetes documentation page and a lot of blogs out there refer to secrets as a "safer option" to store sensitive data. They are safer than storing in plain text as they reduce the risk of accidentally exposing passwords and other sensitive data. In my opinion it's not the secret itself that is safe, it is the practices around it. 

Secrets are not encrypted, so it is not safer in that sense. However, some best practices around using secrets make it safer. As in best practices like:

    Not checking-in secret object definition files to source code repositories.

    Enabling Encryption at Rest for Secrets so they are stored encrypted in ETCD.  


Also the way kubernetes handles secrets. Such as:

    A secret is only sent to a node if a pod on that node requires it.

    Kubelet stores the secret into a tmpfs so that the secret is not written to disk storage.

    Once the Pod that depends on the secret is deleted, kubelet will delete its local copy of the secret data as well.

Read about the protections and risks of using secrets here


Having said that, there are other better ways of handling sensitive data like passwords in Kubernetes, such as using tools like Helm Secrets, HashiCorp Vault. I hope to make a lecture on these in the future.



Secrets!
	Secrets encode data in base64 format. 
	Anyone with the base64 encoded secret can easily decode it. 
	Secrets are not encrypted
	So secrets are not very safe.
	
	Some best practices around using secrets make it safer. 
		Use RBAC and restrict who has access.
		Don't checking-in secret object definition files to source code repositories.
		Enabling Encryption at Rest for Secrets so they are stored encrypted in ETCD. 





Kubernetes handles secrets. 
	A secret is only sent to a node if a pod on that node requires it.
	Kubelet stores the secret into a tmpfs so that the secret is not written to disk storage.
	Once the Pod that depends on the secret is deleted, kubelet will delete its local copy of the secret data as well.


Other ways of handling sensitive data 
	Helm Secrets
	HashiCorp Vault
	etc.